WWC 2021006

Assisting Students Struggling with Mathematics: Intervention in the Elementary Grades  |  Practice Guide Summary  |  4

Recommendation 2

Recommendation 2: Mathematical Language

Teach clear and concise mathematical language and support students’ use of the language to help students effectively communicate their understanding of mathematical concepts Mathematical language is academic language that precisely conveys mathematical ideas, including the vocabulary, terminology, and language structures used when thinking about, talking about, and writing about mathematics.

Understanding mathematical language is critical to students’ learning because it is used in textbooks, curricular and assessment materials, and teachers’ instruction.

When teachers use conversational or informal language instead of mathematical language, students may get confused. For example, some teachers may refer to the commutative property (a + b = b + a) as the “flip-flop property.” Although this creative property name may be viewed as a fun memory device, replacing accurate terms with informal language can confuse students later when they don’t know the connection to the correct formal term commutative property.

Using and practicing correct terminology from the start can eliminate later challenges. How to carry out the recommendation

1. Routinely teach mathematical vocabulary

to build students’ understanding of the mathematics they are learning. Introduce new mathematical vocabulary during instruction and provide context and meaning to the words. Use student-friendly definitions with simple and familiar mathematical words. Simply providing a definition of a term is not sufficient for developing students’ understanding of mathematical vocabulary and concepts.

Link new vocabulary to a variety of examples when possible, including concrete or semi-concrete representations. A graphic organizer, such as in Example 2, can provide a student-friendly definition and visually and symbolically depict a vocabulary word’s meaning, characteristics, examples, and non-examples. Hand gestures and role-playing can also provide context and meaning to mathematical vocabulary.

To support learning across grade levels and settings, schools should consider creating a list of mathematical terminology that is shared among teachers and strategically becomes more sophisticated with each grade.

2. Use clear, concise, and correct mathematical

language throughout lessons to reinforce students’ understanding of important mathematical vocabulary words. Consistent use of mathematical language helps students learn how the terms should be used and develop a deeper understanding of the terms.

Use and emphasize clear, concise, and correct

mathematical language throughout instruction:

when referring to a new or previously learned topic, when discussing homework, and when responding to questions. Model precise mathematical language when explaining your thought process and demonstrating how to solve a problem.

WWC 2021006

Assisting Students Struggling with Mathematics: Intervention in the Elementary Grades  |  Practice Guide Summary  |  5

Recommendation 2

3. Support students in using mathematically

precise language during their verbal and written explanations of their problem solving. Have students provide verbal and written explanations of mathematics concepts during intervention. Offer students a framework for providing explanations, such as sentence starters or a set of guiding questions. It is also helpful for teachers to restate the students’ explanations using correct language when students do not.

Remind students to include the mathematical language modeled and taught during instruction by displaying mathematical vocabulary on the classroom wall.

Example 2. Graphic organizer that depicts a student-friendly definition, characteristics, examples, and non-examples for the term unit fraction.

WWC 2021006

Assisting Students Struggling with Mathematics: Intervention in the Elementary Grades  |  Practice Guide Summary  |  6

Recommendation 3

Recommendation 3: Representations

Use a well-chosen set of concrete and semi-concrete representations to support students’ learning of mathematical concepts and procedures.

Students who struggle to learn mathematics need additional, focused instruction using representations to model mathematical ideas. Choose representations carefully and connect them explicitly to the abstract representations (mathematical notation). It is also important to provide students with many opportunities to use representations.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. Provide students with the concrete and

semi-concrete representations that effectively represent the concept or procedure being covered. Not all representations work for every mathematical concept, so choosing representations must be intentional to be effective. Provide students with the representations that most accurately model the concept or procedure being addressed. When appropriate, use representations that are proportional. For example, when teaching place value, the representation for ones should be one-tenth the size of the representation for tens.

2. When teaching concepts and procedures,

connect concrete and semi-concrete representations to abstract representations. When demonstrating concepts and procedures with concrete and semi-concrete representations, present the mathematical notation simultaneously. It is also important to connect concrete and semi-concrete representations to each other. It is helpful to make these connections when introducing new material, when reviewing previously learned content, and when using familiar representations in a new way. Example 3 demonstrates how the representations can be aligned vertically to demonstrate their connections. -

3. Provide ample and meaningful opportunities for students to use representations to help solidify the use of representations as “thinking tools.” 

Students need many opportunities to work with representations before they will successfully use them to model concepts and procedures and solve problems. Over time, students will begin to more deeply understand mathematics concepts and grasp how representations can be used as “thinking tools”, which are tools to model and solve problems. - Representations can be used when students explain their thinking. At first, students may need help articulating how they used the representations to depict the mathematical concepts.

Pose prompting questions to help students explain how they represented the concepts and/or procedures. As students become more comfortable using representations, routinely ask them to use the representations to explain their solution approach. This helps reinforce the mathematics not only for the student explaining their thinking, but also for the students who are listening to the explanation the student is giving.

4. Revisit concrete and semi-concrete representations periodically to reinforce and

deepen understanding of mathematical ideas. Systematically revisit concrete and semi-concrete representations to reinforce and deepen students’ understanding of mathematical concepts. Also, if students are not able to correctly solve problems or are uncertain about how to approach a problem, encourage them to use a concrete or semi-concrete representation.


