Recommendation 1.

Teach number and operations using a developmental progression. Recommendation 1 image of a teacher with two young students.

Early experience with number and operations is fundamental for acquiring more complex math concepts and skills. The practice guide describes how to teach the main aspects of early number knowledge, from basic number skills to operations, according to a developmental progression.

Developmental progressions can provide teachers with a road map for delivering developmentally appropriate instruction to students of varying skill levels. With each step in a developmental progression, teachers can first focus on working with small collections of objects (one to three items) and then move to progressively larger collections of objects.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. First, provide opportunities for children to practice recognizing the total number of objects in small collections (one to three items) and labeling them with a number word without needing to count them. Teachers can give children experience with immediately recognizing and labeling quantities of a collection by having them answer the question “How many are there?” when looking at collections of one to three objects.

Small-group activities, snack time, and transitions between classroom activities can provide quick opportunities for children to practice recognizing small quantities. To help children construct a more abstract concept of number, teachers can emphasize that collections of three similar objects and three dissimilar objects are both “three.”

2. Next, promote accurate one-to-one counting as a means of identifying the total number of items in a collection. Once children have started to connect numbers with quantity, they can then begin to use one-to-one counting to identify “how many” are in larger collections. In order to count accurately, one—and only one— number word should be assigned to each item in the collection being counted, using the last number counted to determine the total quantity.

The practice guide also includes a discussion of the common counting errors children make when developing counting skills and provides suggestions teachers can use to correct those errors when working with children in one-on-one or small-group situations (see page 19 of the practice guide).

Modeling one-to-one counting with one to three items An il lustration of how teachers can model one-to-one counting with one to three items. The figure shows three squares, with the word “one” written on top of the first square, the word “two” written on top of the second square, and the word “three” written on top of the third square. The figure instructs teachers to count while pointing to each object. The teacher is instructed to emphasize the third object in the sequence: “One, two, three. There are three squares here.”

3. Once children can recognize or count collections, provide opportunities for children to use number words and counting to compare quantities. To begin magnitude comparisons, teachers can ask children to compare small collections of one to three objects visually. Next, children can count or match larger collections of items one-to-one to determine which set has “more.” Once children can comfortably determine “more,” the word “fewer” and the use of written number lists can be introduced. Eventually, teachers can encourage children to use their knowledge of which number comes after another in the counting sequence to determine the larger of two verbal numbers.

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 3

4. Encourage children to label collections with number words and numerals. After children practice recognizing, counting, and comparing quantities, teachers can introduce numerals to children as a way to represent a quantity. As described in the practice guide, teachers can pair numerals with collections of classroom objects so that children start to learn, for example, that the numeral 3, three objects, and the spoken word “three” represent the same thing (see page 21 of the practice guide).

5. Once children develop these fundamental number skills, encourage them to solve basic problems. Once children can determine the total number of items in a collection by using small-number recognition or counting and understand the concepts of “more” and “fewer,” they can explore the effects of adding and subtracting items from a collection. As children become more adept, teachers can progress to more difficult problems with slightly larger numbers.

Summary of evidence The WWC identified 23 studies that examined the effects of interventions that included targeted instruction in number and operations. The research shows a strong pattern of positive effects on children’s early math skills across a range of curricula with a focus on number and operations. Eleven studies demonstrated positive effects for interventions that used a developmental progression to guide instruction in number and operations. While the panel could not confirm whether a developmental progression guided instruction in 12 other studies that taught number and operation, the panel felt that the body of evidence as a whole provided sufficient support to warrant a level of evidence rating of moderate. For more details, see

Recommendation 1 in the practice guide, page 12.