Recommendation 2.

Teach geometry, patterns, measurement, and data analysis using a developmental progression. The practice guide suggests that children’s exposure to math should extend beyond number and operations to include a range of math content areas, including geometry (shapes and space), patterns, measurement, and data analysis. These math content areas should be taught according to developmental progressions.

Learning skills beyond number and operations creates a foundation for future math instruction, and children with strong backgrounds in these areas are more likely to be able to succeed in later grades.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. Help children to recognize, name, and compare shapes, and then teach them to combine and separate shapes. Using their surrounding environment, teachers can provide opportunities for children to make comparisons and distinctions about the basic features of shapes.

Once children are comfortable recognizing and comparing shapes, teachers should encourage children to explore how shapes can be combined and separated to form new shapes. Page 29 of the practice guide suggests activities to help children to learn about spatial relationships between shapes Recommendation 2 image of a young boy sitting with toy trucks and signs in different shapes. and master the concepts of “in,” “on,” “under,” “beside,” “above,” or “below.”

2. Encourage children to look for and identify patterns, then teach them to extend, correct, and create patterns. Pattern instruction can begin by encouraging children to notice and experiment with basic repeating patterns in the world around them, such as stripes on clothing and shapes and designs in rugs. Once children have become familiar with the nature of patterns, they should learn to predict what will happen next in a pattern, based on what has happened so far. Teachers will find ideas in the practice guide for using manipulatives, like the one shown in the example on the next page, to teach children about patterns of increasing complexity (see page 30 of the practice guide).

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 4

3. Promote children’s understanding of measurement by teaching them to make direct comparisons and to use both informal or nonstandard (e.g., the child’s hand or foot) and formal or standard (e.g., a ruler) units and tools. Teachers can help children learn to use measurement vocabulary words (long and short, big and small) to describe similarities and differences while sorting, arranging, and classifying objects. Once children have become comfortable making direct comparisons between and among objects, teachers can provide opportunities to measure objects using nonstandard tools, such as children’s own hands and feet, pencils, blocks, or books. Children can then be introduced to the concept of standard units and tools of measurement.

4. Help children collect and organize information, then teach them to represent that information graphically. Teachers can introduce children to the concept of organizing and displaying information by asking them to count and sort familiar items like toys and blocks. This will help them learn both the characteristics that distinguish the items from one another and the total number in each set relative to other sets.

Once children are familiar with sorting and organizing the information they have collected, they can learn to summarize their information visually through simple graphs and tallies.

Summary of evidence The WWC identified 13 studies that examined the effects of interventions that provided targeted instruction in one or more of the early math content areas (geometry, patterns, measurement, and data analysis). Positive effects were found for geometry, operations, basic number concepts, and general numeracy outcomes. Studies also reported no discernible effects for general numeracy, geometry, and basic number concept outcomes. Although the evidence to support this recommendation is promising, the WWC could not isolate the effects of teaching the early math content areas of geometry, patterns, measurement, and data analysis. As a result, the WWC assigned a level of evidence rating of minimal. For more details, see Recommendation 2 in the practice guide, page 25.