Recommendation 4.

Teach children to view and describe their world mathematically. The practice guide outlines the steps teachers can take to help children view and describe the world mathematically. Teachers can encourage children to describe math ideas in the world around them, gradually moving from informal representations and language to formal representations and math vocabulary as their understanding grows. At first, children can use informal tools such as their fingers, tally marks, or other concrete objects to represent math ideas. Once children are comfortable using math informally, teachers can help them link their informal knowledge to formal math vocabulary and representations, such as math symbols.

Open-ended questions can be used to prompt children to think about how to describe their ideas mathematically. Teachers can reinforce these ideas by encouraging children to look for opportunities to use their developing math skills throughout the school day.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. Encourage children to use informal

methods to represent math concepts, processes, and solutions. Initially, teachers should link math ideas to informal and familiar experiences, terms, or analogies, resisting the urge to use more formal methods until children have a conceptual foundation for understanding them. For example, teachers can first use terms such as “more” and “all together,” terms that represent children’s informal understanding of addition, before using the more formal, symbolic representation.

2. Help children link formal math vocabulary,

symbols, and procedures to their informal knowledge or experiences. Once children develop an understanding of math ideas using informal terms, teachers can show them how their informal knowledge connects to formal math terms and representations. Teachers can start with informal vocabulary, like the phrase “take away,” for example, and then later explain that the formal term “subtract” and the “–” symbol have the same meaning. The practice guide Recommendation 4 image of 2 young students using a magnifying glass to look at several rock specimens.

Lesson ideas for linking familiar concepts to formal symbols Symbol Concept Lesson numerals counting Have children count and record the number of children in attendance each day. + , – operations Have children solve problems involving adding or subtracting with leaves collected from the playground. = equal Show the class four pennies. Next, show three pennies, verbally label them (“I have one, two, three pennies”), and put them in a can. Then, show one more penny, verbally label it (“I have one more penny”), and put it in the can. Ask the class, “Are three pennies and one more penny the same number as four pennies?” < , > unequal Show the class five pennies, verbally label them, and put them in a can.

Next, show four pennies, verbally label them, and put them in a different can. Ask the class, “Which can has more? Which can has fewer?” offers teachers ideas for using math vocabulary with children throughout the school day (see page 44 of the practice guide).

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 7

3. Use open-ended questions to prompt

children to apply their math knowledge. Open-ended questions not only help children to develop cognitive and language skills, but they also can encourage children to use math vocabulary to explain what they have learned.

The practice guide provides teachers with ideas for promoting math-related conversation among young children using open-ended questions.

For example, teachers can use questions that begin with “what,” “why,” or “how” to encourage children to use math vocabulary to explain what they have learned.

4. Encourage children to recognize and talk

about math in everyday situations. Teachers can encourage math thought and conversation by asking children for their help with problems that arise throughout the day. Once children solve the problem, teachers can ask a sequence of questions that prompt the children to share the solution and the strategies used to reach the solution. Teachers will find several examples of ways to encourage math conversation and problem solving during recess, snack, transition, and small- and large-group time in the practice guide (see page 46).

Summary of evidence The WWC identified 16 studies that examined the effects of interventions designed to help children view and describe their world mathematically. Some of the interventions provided math vocabulary words and suggestions for stories, songs, or questions that supported children in learning to view and describe their world mathematically. Studies examining these interventions found positive effects on children’s math outcomes. Although the evidence to support this recommendation is promising, the WWC could not isolate the effects of helping children view and describe their world mathematically, since other recommended practices were also implemented. As a result, the WWC assigned a level of evidence rating of minimal. For more details, see

Recommendation 4 in the practice guide, page 42.