Recommendation 3.

Use progress monitoring to ensure that math instruction builds on what each child knows. Progress monitoring can be a useful way to ensure that children are participating in targeted, purposeful, and meaningful math instruction. By continually monitoring children’s progress, teachers can gather the information they need to match lessons to children’s knowledge levels. Incorporating children’s individual differences into lesson planning by monitoring progress and tailoring instruction can help ensure that children learn fundamental concepts that are appropriately challenging and that will extend their learning. Recommendation 3 image of a teacher helping a young student with his work.

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 5 Progress monitoring is a systematic approach to assessment with the goal of improving skills.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. Use introductory activities, observations, and assessments to determine each child’s existing math knowledge, or the level of understanding or skill he or she has reached on a developmental progression.

When employing progress monitoring, teachers can first gather specific information about each child’s skill level in order to determine where to focus instruction. The practice guide suggests using introductory activities, observation, and formal assessments to determine each child’s level of math understanding.

2. Tailor instruction to each child’s needs, and relate new ideas to his or her existing knowledge. Once teachers have information about a child’s skill level, they can use a developmental progression to determine what the child should learn next and design instructional activities with those needs in mind. Teachers can design small-group activities that are at or slightly above the children’s level of understanding. As detailed in the practice guide, teachers can link math activities to children’s existing interests and across other content areas to build knowledge, including music, art, games, and reading.

3. Assess, record, and monitor each child’s progress so that instructional goals and methods can be adjusted as needed. The chart below illustrates the flow of progress monitoring. The practice guide describes how teachers can apply this ongoing process during math instruction (see page 39 of the practice guide).

It is important to continually monitor progress so that children can be consistently engaged in activities that are neither too far below their level (and therefore not interesting) nor too far above it (and therefore frustrating).

Summary of evidence The WWC identified 12 studies which examined the effects of progress monitoring on children’s math knowledge when used in conjunction with other practices the WWC recommends for teaching math to young children. For example, four studies examining a comprehensive early math curriculum that included supports for regular assessments found that, on average, children participating in the intervention scored higher on math outcomes than did children in the comparison condition. Although the evidence to support this recommendation is promising, the WWC could not isolate the effects of the use of progress monitoring, since other recommended practices were also implemented. As a result, the

WWC assigned a level of evidence rating of minimal.

For more details, see Recommendation 3 in the practice guide, page 36. Ongoing Progress Monitoring An illustration of the order of the steps of progress monitoring. First, teachers use a developmental progression to select an activity that targets a math concept. Then, teachers assess where a child is along the developmental progression by observing and recording their skills. Based on this information, teachers can plan and implement activities to appropriately extend children’s skills. Teachers continue the progress monitoring process by continuing to assess children’s development, recording their progress, and planning activities that provide children with opportunities to master the next step in the developmental progression.

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 6