Recommendation 5.

Dedicate time each day to teaching math, and integrate math instruction throughout the school day. Devoting class time to planned, daily math lessons helps children strengthen math skills. By connecting math to a variety of everyday situations and routines, teachers can make math meaningful and provide opportunities for children to practice what they have learned in a purposeful manner. A mathrich environment can help generate excitement among children and encourage them apply their math knowledge in a meaningful way.

How to carry out the recommendation

1. Plan daily instruction targeting specific

math concepts and skills. In order for young children to develop a strong foundation of math skills, teachers can dedicate time each day for purposeful math instruction. During math lessons, children can learn specific skills and build upon them throughout the rest of the day. The practice guide describes how large and small groups can be used during dedicated math time to tailor Recommendation 5 image of young girl with number puzzle. instruction for children at different developmental levels (see page 49 of the practice guide).

2. Embed math in classroom routines and

activities. A daily or weekly schedule provides many opportunities to reinforce math concepts outside of the dedicated math instruction period. Routines such as taking attendance or

Teaching Math to Young Children Practice Guide Summary 8 snack time can serve a math purpose in addition to a practical one, providing opportunities for counting, comparisons, and graphing.

3. Highlight math within topics of study

across the curriculum. Teachers can integrate math concepts into non-math lessons by highlighting the aspects of math that are already present in the curriculum. This gives children opportunities to count and measure objects, examine shapes, and analyze data (depending on the current math objectives). The practice guide provides examples of ways to integrate different math content areas into literature, science, art, health and safety, and social studies lessons (see page 51 of the practice guide).

4. Create a math-rich environment where

children can recognize and meaningfully apply math. Teachers can provide opportunities for children to see and use math concepts on a regular basis by creating a math-rich classroom environment. This enrichment can be done by making math-related objects and tools readily available, labeling and organizing them so they are easy to find and use, and organizing activities and routines with numeric systems. Teachers can also explicitly teach children how to use math tools by modeling their use during small- or large-group time.

An example of a math-rich environment in the classroom. An illustrati on of a mathr i c h

c l a s sr oo m environment. Art stations and storage cubbies are labeled with numbers or shapes. A round clock with large numbers reinforces the concept of time, and classroom rules are listed on a numbered chart.

5. Use games to teach math concepts and

skills and to give children practice in applying them. Games can provide an engaging opportunity for children to practice and extend skills, and the practice guide supplies several examples of games teachers can use to encourage children to apply their math knowledge. Teachers can use games that are included in math curricula, purchase games, make games themselves, or use games that come up during natural play, like hopscotch or jump rope, to reinforce math concepts. Teachers can get involved with the game-playing in order to ensure educational play or to challenge children to extend their skills.

Summary of evidence The WWC identified 20 studies that examined the effects of interventions that included dedicated time for math instruction, integration of math into other aspects of the school day, and the use of games to practice math skills. A group of studies found that children who played number-based board games performed better in the domain of basic number concepts than did children who played color-based board games or no board games. Although the evidence to support this recommendation is promising, the WWC could not isolate the effects of the use of dedicated time for math instruction, integration of math into other aspects of the school day, and the use of games to practice math skills, since other recommended practices were also implemented. As a result, the WWC assigned a level of evidence rating of minimal. For more details, see Recommendation 5 in the practice guide, page 47.

Sign up to receive additional information from the What Works Clearinghouse at

http://ies.ed.gov/newsflash/.

What Works Clearinghouse™ whatworks.ed.gov