Recommendation 8.

Include motivational strategies in tier 2 and tier 3 interventions. Adults can sometimes forget how challenging so-called “basic” arithmetic is for students in tier 2 and tier 3 interventions. Many of these students have had experiences of failure and frustration with mathematics by the time they receive an intervention. They may also have a particularly difficult time storing and easily retrieving information in their memories.163 Therefore, it seems particularly important to provide additional motivation for these students.164 Praising students for their effort and for being engaged as they work through mathematics problems is a powerful motivational tool that can be effective in increasing students’ academic achievement.165 Tier 2 and tier 3 interventions should include components that promote student effort (engagement-contingent rewards), persistence (completion-contingent rewards), and achievement (performance-contingent rewards).

These components can include praise and rewards. Even a well-designed intervention curriculum may falter without such behavioral supports.

The scope of this practice guide limited the motivational strategies reviewed to strategies used in studies of students struggling with math­ematics.  For a wider review of effective motivational strategies used in classrooms, see Epstein et al. (2008) and Halpern et al. (2007).

Level of evidence: Low

The panel judged the level of evidence supporting this recommendation to be low. This recommendation is based on the professional opinion of the panel, and on nine studies that met WWC standards or met standards with reservations that included motivational strategies in the intervention.166 Although one of these studies demonstrated that praising strug­gling students for their effort significantly improved their ability to solve subtraction problems with regrouping,167 other stud­ies included a motivational component as one of several components of the inter­vention. In the opinion of the panel, these studies did not show that a motivational component is essential but suggest that it may be useful for improving mathematics achievement.168 Brief summary of evidence to support the recommendation One study that met WWC standards examined the effects of a motivational component by comparing the performance of students who received praise for their effort dur­ing subtraction instruction with those who did not receive praise.169 This study found significant positive effects on student sub­ traction scores in favor of providing effort feedback.170 Although this study provides some evidence of the effectiveness of a motivational strategy, it is the only study that explicitly tested the effects of motivational strategies on mathematics outcomes. In two studies, students received points for engagement and attentiveness,171 and in three studies, students were provided with prizes as tangible reinforcers for ac­ curate mathematics problem-solving.172 However, in each of these studies, it was not possible to isolate the effects of rein­ forcing attentiveness and accuracy. For example, in two of the studies, students in tier 2 tutoring earned prizes for accuracy.173 Although in both studies, the tier 2 intervention group demonstrated substantively important positive and sometimes significant gains on a variety of mathemat­ics measures relative to the students who remained in tier 1, it is not possible to iso­ late the effects of the reinforcers from the provision of tier 2 tutoring. Another study examined the impact of parental involvement on students’ mathematics achievement and found statistically significant positive effects on operations and general math achievement.174 However, because the parental involvement component was multifaceted, it is not possible to attribute the positive effects to rewards alone.

*There is an extensive literature on motiva­tional strategies outside the scope of this practice guide. For more information on motivational strategies see Epstein et al. (2008) and Halpern et al. (2007).

Five studies in the evidence base included interventions in which students graphed their progress and in some cases set goals for improvement on future assessments.175

One experimental study examined the effects of student graphing and goal setting as an independent variable and found substantively important positive effects on measures of word problems in favor of students who graphed and set goals. The other four studies did not isolate the effects of graphing progress. Because this recommendation is based primarily on the opinion of the panel, the level of evidence is identified as low.

How to carry out this recommendation

1. Reinforce or praise students for their effort

and for attending to and being engaged in the lesson. Verbally praise students for their effort178 and for listening carefully and following the lesson in a systematic fashion (engagement-contingent rewards).179 The panel believes that praise should be immediate and specific to highlight student effort and engagement. But we also believe that it is ineffective to offer generic and empty praise (“good job!” or “keep up the good work!”) that is not related to actual effort.

Instead, praise is most effective when it points to specific progress that students are making and recognizes students’ actual effort.180 Systematically praising students for their effort and engagement may encourage them to remain focused on the completion of their work.

2. Consider rewarding student accom­plishments. Consider using rewards to acknowledge completion of math tasks (completion contingent rewards) and accurate work (performance-contingent rewards). This can be done by applauding or verbally


Recommendation 8. Include motivational strategies

( 46 ) praising students for actual accomplish­ments, such as finishing assignments, im­proving their score from 70 percent to 80 percent correct, or giving students points or tokens each time they answer a problem correctly, which they can use to “buy” tangi­ble rewards at a later time.181 Again, praise should be specific rather than generic.182 Consider notifying the student’s parents to inform them of their child’s successes in mathematics by phone or email or in a note sent home with the student.183 Remember that parents of these students are likely to receive notification of problems rather than successes, and some evidence suggests that this specific positive attention might sup­ port achievement growth.184

3. Allow students to chart their progress and

to set goals for improvement. Several of the interventions in the evi­dence base for this practice guide had stu­dents graph their progress on charts185 and set goals for improving their assessment scores.186 For example, students might graph their scores on a chart showing a se­ries of thermometers, one for each session of the intervention.187 At the beginning of each session, students can examine their charts and set a goal to beat their previ­ous score or to receive the maximum score.

This type of goal setting is believed to help students develop self-regulated learning because students take independent responsibility for setting and achieving goals.

Roadblocks and suggested approaches 

Roadblock 8.1. Rewards can reduce genuine interest in mathematics by directing student attention to gathering rewards rather than learning math.

Suggested Approach. It is important to inform interventionists that research in other content areas has demonstrated that rewards and praise increase the likelihood of students’ academic success without diminishing their interest in learning.189 Given the frequent history of failure for many of these students, at least in the ele­mentary grades, we suggest using rewards and praise to encourage effort, engage­ment, and achievement. As students learn and succeed more often in mathematics, interventionists can gradually fade the use of rewards because student success will become an intrinsic reward. The WWC Reducing Behavior Problems in the Elementary School Classroom Practice Guide190 is a good reference for more information on the use of rewards and praise.

Roadblock 8.2. It is difficult to determine appropriate rewards for individual students. Suggested Approach. Consider each student's interests before choosing an appropriate reward. Also consider using opportunities to engage in activities students are interested in as rewards to reinforce effort, engagement, and accurate work. Parents may also have ideas for rewards that will help motivate their children. Schools can engage parents in rewarding students and coordinate efforts to reward children at home as well.

Roadblock 8.3. Providing feedback and rewarding achievement detracts from class­ room instructional time. It is difficult to fit it into the classroom schedule.

Suggested Approach. Verbally praising students for their effort individually and their engagement in small group lessons requires very little time. Awarding points or tokens for correct responses can be done when the teacher grades the student’s work. To reduce the amount of time it takes for students to “buy” prizes with accumulated points or tokens, ask students to choose which prize they want before they “buy” it. The prizes can then be distributed quickly at the end of the day, so that students are not distracted by the items throughout the school day.


